Good afternoon, good afternoon, and welcome. Welcome everyone. Thank you very much for coming
and participating. Again, this is the again day we're doing a continual asset healing retreat,
or retreat, to reactivate our beautiful spiritual Dharma products in our heart.
We've heard so many, or we received so many teachings from great masters many times in the past,
and also we read many books. All those are so wonderful and so special. For now it's also time
to put that into practice, activate it, and that is also very, very important. And intellectually
understanding it is very special and beautiful, but more than that, according to the teaching
practices. After when you receive the teaching, when you know intellectually, then you put that
into the practices. Practices, and that is really the settle in the heart and the discovery
of our inner nature. Intellectual knowledge only will not bring big benefits. For example,
ever you know all the remedies of the goals, healing remedies, but if you don't apply those
as you know, what is not going to benefit too much for what we like to heal. If we like to heal,
post of course is very important to know all the remedies, all those tools and remedies and things.
Once you know that, then the most important trick, I would like to get the result, tangible result,
you have to put that remedies into action, or you have to put activated that, and then apply that.
Then it will make a difference. Similarly, intellectually knowing dharma is of course
always beautiful. Dharma is special, isn't that true. And small will get small, medium will get,
oh small understanding will get small benefit, medium understanding will get a medium benefit,
bigger understanding will get a bigger benefit in our lives. And smoothing our life and make more
sense of the meaning for life is really able to dance. But however, if we put that into the
practice,
meditate, then it will really make a big difference. We can witness that by all those
great masters, those learned scholars, their geners, their intellectually super duples,
all those great masters, but that didn't stop there. They put practices, they did retreat,
stuck, and they truly then become the great symbol of the peace, beacon of the world,
of love, kindness, compassion, respect, appreciation, humble and simple,
simple. It truly beings, great beings they become, because they absorb teaching into the heart,
that isolated their inner Buddha potentials, that wake up Buddha potentials. So therefore,
this time is kind of strange circumstances we had. Everyone has got these strange circumstances,
but we can use these strange circumstances to inner development, inner growth. And sometimes,
also some really we can expand it and develop our body, for all those beings who are going through
really challenges, big challenges, one after another. So really thinking of that. So therefore,
in those senses, we feel happy, in joy, more grateful, and thankful with our opportunity
situation, for same time, activating our body, each other, in a heart, mind, as great teacher,
Buddha Shaktamuni, and all those great Bodhisattvasa mankind in the teaching, really kind of
reaching
what we're doing, benefit for all living beings. But to agree with that, then bring some
understanding
of the Vajrayana teaching of the three Vajrayana status. Vajrayana form, Vajrayana song,
and the Vajrayana space and mind. Those are realizations that what is our goal. So our goal,
not just a wait, kind of why, or later, we should start it now. It's important, all of those.
So with this, again, we go over the teachings of the Jyabdhi, the new universe,
all his oldest of the new universe, and heart, advice to the fourth and the students. We are
going again, continually, slowly, but we are kind of in some way exploring the root and the meaning
of the of the teachings that not just going, going so fast and quickly kind of go over that,
we're going in a way, word by word, line by line, exploring that it is a flavor,
it is godless, it is a meaning, and when we say that it is meaning, looks like I'm talking of
object,
but reality is our mind. We're exploring the beauty and the knowledge of our innate nature,
so we can glorify what will have to be really, and what what greatest teacher, Buddha, and all
those
great body, bodhisattvas did and are doing. So we're following in that team, that, that target.
So therefore, we're going slowly in a way. So now talking about, first with this,
very important is in a Buddhism or in a practicing lineage. Practicing lineage,
first a reflecting of the poor point of the mind, training of the mind on the other world for
renunciation thoughts. I, and we went through that quite even thoroughly, in a way, reminding each
others. And then after the once you have that kind of thought nicely and beautifully, and we'll
recognize that or understand or reminded that clearly, and then we turn our mind to the three
jewels, Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. And to turn the mind to the Buddha, Dharma, Sangha, and in the
teaching said trust, that is really important. But I'm going to talk though, maybe later, I will
talk
that, trust. But first, I'm going to talk about three jewels, later with three jewels. And we went
through again, book about the Buddha, about the Dharma, and about the Sanghas. Today, generally,
the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha is a very general teaching of all the Buddhist schools. What that
means, all Buddhist schools, talking about, from Dejan Buddhist schools. From Dejan Buddhist
schools,
what that means, I'm talking about, such as Theravadas, in Southern Buddhist schools.
And Sarva Istvabada, schools of the Northern Buddhist schools, which is, for example,
the way the Buddhists, all those Mahayana countries, according to the modern grade master, all the
Mahayana
countries are based on the Sarva Istvabada schools of the foundation Buddhist schools.
These foundation schools are generally, after Buddha's Mahakharic, 100 years, aboard 100 years
after Buddha's Mahakharic Nirvana, the foundation schools of Buddha teaching is expanded and become
18 different sub-schools, expanded around 200, 300 years ago. There is 18 different
sub-schools of the foundation schools, that including Theravada, and as well as Sarva Istvabada
schools. And, but, however, now, while also a great master's modern time,
he says, now, only among that, 200 principles exist. Theravada schools of the Southern Buddhism,
and Sarva Istvabada schools of the Northern Buddhism that exist. These are the foundations
of the Buddhists. These are the foundations of the Mahayana school, these are Super Mahayana school
,
and these are the foundations of the Vajrayana Buddhism schools. So, these three jewels
is the foundation of all schools of Buddhists, whether you are the Theravada or Sarva Istvab,
or Super Mahayana or Vajrayana, this is the foundation. This is the cornerstone.
This is the foundation stone, or that is the corner pillars of the Buddhists. Not just only
that, when you say cornerstone, or corner, corner, it supports all, that cornerstone,
we're going to support all the way top of the pinnacle of the building. Similarly,
refugee is the essential, what Buddha Dharma Sangha is essential of the building structures,
or the Buddhist forms. Now, so, this is no difference at all, but, however, in the Vajrayana
school, there is also different terminologies, equal willingness of the Buddha Dharma Sangha.
Many of you, or we all know, one of those, those are known as the Guru Deva Dakinis, Guru Deva Dak
inis.
And in the Tibetan, they translate it as Lama, Yedam, Khandro, those are really
teaching. And Guru, I will use as the Sanskrit terminology, Guru. Guru is,
the word is always in the teaching, Guru is the root of blessings.
And these are the root, root of accomplishments. And Dakinis are the root of all
fulfillment, or the activity of the benefits, beneficial activities. Those are, they're called,
also in this simple word, these three are, named in the Vajrayana teaching, three roots, three root
,
root of blessings, root of accomplishment, root of beneficial activities, benefit activities.
So how that is, actually, is like, as the equivalent of the Buddha Dharma Sangha.
Guru as Buddha, Yedam as Dharma, or the deity as Dharma, Dakini as Sangha members, Sangha members.
And again, each of those, each of Guru, deity, and Yedam, they also represent all of those three
truths. So that means, Guru is embodiment of the three roots. And Yedam is also embodiment of three
roots. Dakini is also embodiment of three roots. They are not completely different from the East,
West, North, or South. It's all within that. And that, and if that, everybody know that,
everybody like to know that, everybody use that, each of those represented that. And Guru,
represented both of them. The realization of the Guru is Buddha.
The teaching of the Guru is Dharma. And the body, physical form of Guru is Sangha members.
And therefore, and also Guru is also within, Guru embodies all the three roots too.
And that way, Guru, body, physical form of the Guru, representing as, as Gurus.
And the tea activity of the Guru, representing as Dakinis. And realization of the Guru,
representing as deity or Yedams. So that goes on and on within Yedam or the deity and in Dakinis.
So this is the word, really known as the object, the rafu, of the Vaidyana teaching.
That also used, but it didn't mean they don't use the terminology of the Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha.
They use terminology and also they do practice in that same terminology, but yet they have addition
of that rafu, which is equal will, it is not missing or something or any or subtract or anything
like that.
So that is really simple way to tell inner or tantra to you, object or rafus.
Then inner tantra, so if I use the word outer object or rafu, inner object or rafu.
So outer object or rafu is the Buddha, Dhamma, Sangha. Inner object or rafu is Ah, Guru, Deva, Dak
ini.
And then, signal object or rafus, particularly inner tantras. Those are known as, then,
as channel, wind and essence element of the bodies. That also has three objects of rafus.
The reality level, these three are channel, wind, essence, Ah. The nature is enlightened states.
Therefore, in the Vedayana teaching said, our own physical body is divine mandalas.
Divine mandala. And not just only the body, the universe is divine mandalas,
reality levels. So to activate that realization, clearly not just any intellectual state,
to activate that, then there is plenty of teachings and instructions of the channelness.
And wind and the essence element of the bodies.
Nature of the essence element of body is Buddha. And nature of the essence of the wind is Dhamma.
And when the nature of the essence or the nature of the channels are Sangha members,
Sangha members. All the nature of the essence element is Guru.
The nature of the essence element of the wind is teaching.
All items, the nature of the essence or element of the channel is dakinis.
So it is within the completely the channels, wind and essence elements are the essential
quality of this skillful means of the body of mandalas. This is what really actually in the
teaching says. And how many channels are there? In the Buddha teaching together he said numbers,
there's even no numbers. How many channels in our body? There's no numbers, numbers. But however,
the principle channels, then use three that you can activate it in the teaching, highlight that
it's three channels. And four or five jackals, or even sometimes seven jackals. It depends
with the teachings. So those are the channels. Channels I need to build. It's translated as
Sami. It is the root of the body. It is the foundation. Channels are the foundation of the
voltage. So therefore it's called Sami. And three principle channels and five jackals.
And those are the ground jackals, and speech jackals, and heart jackals, and navel jackals.
And then we add more like that. Those are the very popular in the teachings.
Men should always say, but if you had a quality, there's also three extras. All armies depend with
different dandruff teachings, but those are known as jackalas of the signal centers,
and jackalas of the pious, jackalas of the wind. Those are the many seven different jackals,
jackalas. And all those are the jackalas, and they are the passage of the wind.
Passage of the essence element of the, the essence element of the body. So those are known as jack
alas.
reality, really, these jackalas are, according to the teaching, it is, if we talk more higher level
according to the teaching, jackalas are display of the nirmakas. They are enlightened as nirmakas.
They are essence. Nature is in the nirmakas sense. So now that jackala is filled with the wind and
essence element of the bodies. And this is wind, this is earth, known as pipe principle wind,
and pipe soft principle wind. And those pipe soft principle winds are related with
pipe senses organs related. And generally in the video and teaching or in Buddhism,
this movement of our intelligence and the movement of the channels or the movement of the essence
element of learning is all carried by the wind. Wind, wind is the most powerful or one of the
most powerful elements in our body or in the world. It controls the movement. It controls the
existence. It controls the expanding. It controls everything. Even in the teaching sense, mind is
controlled by the wind. Wind. So wind is so strong, so powerful. And as well as our very life, wind
is
sustaining our bodies. It is keeping our body. It's spreading all the energies, all the vitality,
all the nutritious, all this evenly academic and a different area part of the bodies.
And therefore our conflictions and all those everything, all our other energy and all those
are maintained beautifully. So this is known as the chakras or the passage of chakra and through
that
then is wind. I'm talking wind. So this is through the wind that is so powerful. Of course, I'm not
going to talk those details of the wind, all that. And of course you can find, I'm sure you already
know those things. So I'm just really reminded. So now what is this wind? Reality, this wind is
in the inner thought level, it is no other than the sambukaya. Wind, this is sambukaya. All wind
is the dharma. It is the movement. This is the activities. For example, greatest teacher Buddha
Chakra Muni performed so many beneficial activities. But among that, the most powerful activity of
the
gracious teacher Buddha Chakra Muni is teaching dharma. That is the most powerful activity
of the gracious teachers. Similarly, wind is the most powerful, powerful and that carries
the quality of the, it is nature and beauty. And then of course, if we twisted the wind,
then it also lead all the numerous troubles and chaos texts, chaos texts in the samsara.
Those are known as the garment winds. And then it controls, wind controls our environments,
our perceptions, our constructions, our ideas, our feelings. That's how this wind is really so
strong
and so can relate, subtle, vital to our our own existence. So reality level, when you activate,
when you receive the teaching in practice, use that into that. That is then the teaching or this
is then the sambukaya. You discover it, call it of the sambukaya natures. Natures. Then next one is
optical graph which is in the, so now what I've taught. So chana, wind, and now at the next one,
I'm talking about essence element of the body. Essence element of body, how many there? To
summarize that in the teaching is white and red essence elements. That is the essence element of
the body. And that is actually what is the teaching, what it is. That is our essence of the
physical
forms. And indeed drawn this white and red element is not just only kind of like that we obtained
from
the parent, but it also connected with our own Buddha nature, our own potential of the nature of
the mind. It is connected. That wind is reflected in the kind of like subtle form, the essence
element
of the body of the white and the red. It is recorded the teaching is principally located
on the white essence element is on the current chakra. Red essence element is above the neural
chakra or also not about the secret chakras, but throughout physical or throughout the physical
mandala, it is spread out all over. As maybe I use the example, as mustard seed is pervasive oil
everywhere. Same way this essence element is progressively spread out with everywhere
channels and carried by the wind and evenly pervaded. But nature of this essence element
a core inner tantra, then it is dharmakaya buddhas or it is buddha. It is really buddha.
Poem buddha came in the form of the essence element of the body. So knowing those
resilient teachings, activating those qualities or even is merely kind of like opening the door
up to understand discover of these physical major structures to kind of like activate it with a
little motivation. A core energy is very important not blocking our kind of like knowledge and
completely shut down, but opening the door is so important. When we discover that our own physical
body is like the mandala of the deity, then we begin to discover that the whole this universe
is a mandala or the pure land of the Buddha. Then it really we will see. So therefore this is also
known as the with that understated and checked in reference channel as a dharmakaya, wind as a
sambokaya and essence element of the body as dharmakayas. Those are known as that it is a
cigarette object of reference cigarette object of reference. Then the ultimate effort taken of
rafujis. Rafujis and then in zokki teaching is one's own nature of the mind. Nature of the one's
own nature of the mind, one's own awareness is the embodiment of three jewels. Buddha, dharma,
sangha, embodiment of the three roots. Guru, deva, dakini and then one's own nature of the mind or
the ruka. The awareness is the nature of the three kaya, dharmakaya, sambokaya and then makayas.
And that is what really the nature of mind. This nature of the mind is not
partialities. Some people have, some people don't have. No, everyone has equally. That means even
animals, even their experience the most heavy is the karmic resources, still is shining in their
heart as a jewel in deep storms or diamond in the deep stones. It's shining, glowing,
radiating that yet, heavy karna is the blood, heavy karna of that solid storm blocked of that.
But otherwise, every living being has that qualities. Therefore, every living being has the
right to discover of this nature. Every living being has the right opportunity to discover.
But who is going to discover? Each of us is going to discover how with courage, with commitment,
with confidence, with joy, with loving body, with loving kindness and compassion, with relaxed,
calm, and humble, simple, droned earth. And then we begin to process, to go discover our beauty.
When we discover this beauty, how that will happen, how that will become, then re-livestored
of the greatest teacher, Buddha Shatamunus, Gaurapayama Sambo, great master, Gungchimpas,
all those great masters, that's what they really did, they discovered. How that will be when you
see them, these individuals, how that will be externally, maybe they're just the same person,
as we are many up. But reality, their nature, their characteristics, calm, peaceful, humble,
simple, and more content, contentment, happy, happy with the literals, even though it looks like
kind
of like heart situation, circumstance, reality for them is like really pure nature. For them,
for those reasons, read the songs of those great monsters, read their songs. How beautiful, even in
the heart environment, in a high altitude, like 17,000 feet above the sea levels, levels in the
cold, and the snow, and ice, and all that, but yet they sing in song, how beautiful, how nice,
and all the beautiful boy, they met all that, how much they're happy, they're like peaceful,
their heart is completely filled with love and kindness, compared to all living beings. That is
how they discovered this innate nature, nature. So now again, talking about this essence nature
of the mind, and one in the teaching city, the emptiness nature of the mind is dharma kaya.
The clarity nature of the mind or awareness is sambhokaya, and display a compact nature of the
mind is narmakayas. All emptiness nature of the mind is Buddha. The clarity aspect of the mind,
nature of mind, or I'm using nature of mind, but also can be rippa. In clarity aspect of rippa,
the awareness is dharma. In the comparison, display aspect of the nature of the mind
is the sanga members. Therefore, nature of the mind is, as I said in the according teaching,
is embodiment of the Buddha dharma sanga, embodiment of the guru deva dakinis, and nature
of the mind is embodiment of the Buddha, sorry, dharma kaya, sambhokaya, and narmakaya Buddha.
And that is within our, within each of us. And where is that, according by the Anattika
and the Dokitika, it resides into the heart, heart center. It's right in our heart center.
We have this divine luminous unique quality that we have all. At this level, there's no difference
between Buddha, the total enlightenment Buddha, and ourself. We have the same nature. So that is
my brief talk today. And thank you very much everyone again for participating. And together,
again, we had the opportunity to talk a little bit about that. And so now I'm going to conclude
with the talks on the Buddha dharma sanga from today. So then I'll move to the next topic,
which is a result of course with Bodhicitta. And then we go, oh, okay, thank you so much.
Even though maybe three of you and whoever are watching and everything, talking and reading,
Buddha, dharma, sanga, and all that things. But so, okay, thank you. Thank you, everyone.
[BLANK_AUDIO]